docs(pg-delta): document identity and ACL invariants (#353)
supabase/pg-delta: docs/architecture/identity-and-acl.md

| `membership` | `role`, `member` |
| `userMapping` | `role` |
| `defaultPrivilege` | `role`, `grantee` |
| `acl` | `grantee`; recursively, a role-bearing `target` |
| `comment` | recursively, a role-bearing `target` |
| `securityLabel` | recursively, a role-bearing `target` |

Two important role references are outside that table:

- an `owner` is a dependency edge whose `to` endpoint is a role, not a
  StableId kind;
- `policy.roles` is a structured payload field, not identity.

The registry guard test forces every new StableId kind to be classified, but it
cannot protect payload fields. Whenever a new catalog field contains a role
name, decide explicitly whether it belongs in identity, an edge, or structured
payload. Do not derive or repair the reference by parsing SQL text.

## Rename flow: current and target

### Current implementation

Current planning performs these steps:

1. Reconstruct the managed source and desired views.
2. Run generic diff and policy filtering; build remove/add worklists from kept
   deltas.
3. Propose rename-capable roots whose identity-free structural rollups match.
   Ambiguous and near-miss candidates are reported, never guessed.

> 4. Accept candidates according to `auto`, `prompt`, and explicit confirmation;

Author: Minor wording: this reads like three acceptance modes, but `RenameMode` is `"auto" | "prompt" | "off"` (`src/plan/renames.ts:21`), with explicit confirmations being a separate input alongside it.

```suggestion
4. Accept candidates according to the rename mode (`auto`/`prompt`/`off`) and
   explicit confirmations;
```

Author: Applied in 627df715: the text now lists all rename modes (auto, prompt, and off) and treats explicit confirmations as a separate input.

   cancel their old and new subtrees from create/drop worklists.
5. For accepted role renames, relabel role-bearing StableIds after the diff.
   Cancel unchanged remove/add pairs and matching owner unlink/link pairs;

>    convert payload-changed pairs into mutations against the new identity.

Author: **Low:** “relabel role-bearing StableIds after the diff” can be read as rewriting the fact base (that’s I1). Today, `relabelRoleNames` only matches deltas so carry can cancel/mutate pairs — it does not normalize ids in either fact base.

Prefer wording like “match deltas by relabeling role-bearing ids” (or equivalent) so current ≠ target stays sharp.

Author: Fixed in 627df715. The current-flow step now says carry matches remove/add deltas by relabeling role-bearing IDs and explicitly says neither fact base is rewritten.

6. Emit the rename separately, with the old subtree in `destroys` and the new
   subtree in `produces`, so dependent actions order against both names.

This post-diff carry lives in
[`role-rename-carry.ts`](../../packages/pg-delta/src/plan/role-rename-carry.ts).
It cannot relabel `policy.roles`, because that reference is payload-carried.
The current planner therefore retains the narrow B1 ordering carve-out for a

> policy mutation spanning an accepted role rename.

Author: **Nit:** B1 carve-out is real (`internal.ts` + merged #349), but unlike I1 there’s no link to the track doc. Consider linking `[B1](../roadmap/agent-tracks/B1-role-rename-policy-cycle.md)` here.

Author: Added the B1 track link in 627df715.

4. The existing rename-emission seam still renders SQL from the original
   physical old/new facts.

Only the source fingerprint remains tied to the physical pre-rename source.
Everything else consumes the canonical pair. When I1 lands, the role carry
module and B1 carve-out should disappear; until then, documentation and tests
must describe them as current behavior.

## ACL identity and equality

An ACL is a satellite fact. Its identity is:

```ts
{ kind: "acl", target: StableId, grantee: string, column?: string }
```

For an object-level grant, `target` is the object and `column` is absent. For a
column-level grant such as `GRANT SELECT (email) ON users TO reporter`, `target`
remains the owning relation and `column` contains `email`; the fact's parent is
the column fact. Keeping the optional column in the codec and every identity
rewrite is essential—dropping it aliases a column grant with an object grant.

The semantic payload contains sorted `privileges` and `grantable` sets.
Extraction models the grantee's **effective privileges**, not which grantor
supplied them. `aclexplode()` can return the same privilege once per grantor;

> the extractor groups by grantee and de-duplicates privilege and grant-option

Author: Fixed in ec5df78e. The document now says explicit per-grantee ACL privileges and explicitly excludes role memberships, owner-implied privileges, inherited access, and the complete authorization closure.

values. Consequently:

- two databases with the same effective grantee privileges compare equal even
  if grantor provenance differs;
- removing one of several equivalent grantors is intentionally invisible while
  the effective set remains;
- export and replay preserve effective access, not exact GRANT provenance.

Ordinary object ACL extraction normalizes a null ACL through `acldefault()` and
synthesizes empty owner/PUBLIC entries when a built-in default was revoked. An
extension member instead records only differences from `pg_init_privs` (or the
object default), because recreating the extension restores the installed ACL.

## Non-semantic underscore payload fields

[`canonicalize()`](../../packages/pg-delta/src/core/hash.ts) recursively omits
every object key beginning with `_`. Those fields therefore cannot change fact
hashes, diff deltas, fingerprints, or state-proof equality.

They are not dead data. They can guide a plan whose semantic need is already
established by hashed state:

> | Field | Purpose and consumer |

Author: Optional, non-blocking: this inventory will silently drift as `_` fields are added. The role-kind table above is protected transitively by the registry guard test, but nothing guards this one. A tiny unit test asserting the known set of `_`-prefixed payload field names (mirroring the `role-rename-carry.test.ts` guard pattern) would force new fields to land here too. Fine as a follow-up.

Author: Agreed that a registry guard would be useful follow-up coverage. For this docs-only I2 track, ec5df78e labels the table as the current inventory; adding a runtime guard would expand beyond the track ownership and acceptance criteria.

| `_serverMajor` | Selects only subscription mutations supported by the captured PostgreSQL version. |
| `_configGucs` | Keeps assumed-schema seeding from replaying routines that require unsafe configuration. |

The rule for adding one is strict: changing an underscore field alone must not
represent desired-state drift, because generic diff will never see it. Use an
underscore field only for extraction provenance, rendering context, ordering,
or safety. If changing the value must produce DDL by itself, it is semantic and
must not begin with `_`.

## Proof implications

State proof applies the finished plan, re-extracts the clone, reconstructs the
same managed view, and compares it with the projected desired view. The
post-apply catalog must therefore use the desired declarative ids and names;
underscore hints cannot rescue a state mismatch because proof does not include
them in equality.

Data proof has a narrower rename rule. Accepted table and materialized-view
renames map the old relation key used for pre-apply row statistics to the new
relation key used after apply. That prevents a data-preserving rename from being

> misclassified as drop/recreate. Role and other object renames do not use this

Author: Fixed in 627df715. The proof section now states that row statistics cover only ordinary heap tables (relkind r); materialized views and partitioned roots receive state-proof coverage only.
